[Intro: De La Soul]
It's comin' out, it's comin' out
It's comin' out y'all, it's comin' out y'all
So Com Sense, Plug One (Plug One)
Mos Def (Mos Def), ha ha ha ha
Dr. Ama (Dr. Ama), Maseo, De La (De La)
Ha ha ha ha
L.I. (L.I.), Brooklyn (Brooklyn), Chi-town (Chi-town)
Ha ha ha ha (What)
You see, this is the way, this is the way (Way)
This is the way we organize

[Verse 1: Trugoy the Dove]
I speak divine of God theories, no need to be high
Always exhale the facts 'cause I don't inhale lye/lie
Play the greater man's game, to bounce off my losses
So I can earn the acres (Uh), the houses (Uh), the horses (Uh)
Of course it's much greater than your Benz or your Lex
The engine to my comprehension is just too complex
Much too complex, EFX/effects be live like Das
Making moves down South, to avoid the chaos
And never, flaunt the coin 'cause dime-getters be gazin' (What they call you?)
They call me Luther Van', they say my style is So Amazin' (Ha ha)
I'm fazin' those who're supposed to have the last laughter
'Cause even when I'm gone I'm reappearin in the after
I haveta, send respects to real money makers
Do not connect us with those champaign sippin' money fakers
Taste the quarter pound from N.Y. to Chi-town
What that prove? You're so full you can't even move
[Chorus]
[Trugoy the Dove]
'Cause I'm the D-to-the-O, the-V-to-the-E
And can't no other brothers cook these delicacies

[Posdnous]
Well, I'm the P-L-U, the G-to-the-One
Walk around the planet Earth making money having fun

[Common]
I'm the C-to-the-O, double-M-O-N
I sit and think with a drink about how I'm gonna win
I'm the C-to-the-O, double-M-O-N
I sit and think with a drink...
(Check it out now)

[Verse 2: Common]
Do you wanna be a MC? Or do you wanna serve?
Do you wanna be dope? Or do you wanna deal it?
Fabricated acryllic, I feel it, I'm the style molester
I do a show, get Extra P's like the Large Professor
In fact I get more hoes than Tessa, peep game like a refe-ree
In sole control of my desti-ny
In the best of, three out of five (What?)
Whip anybody ass at NBA Live
Rappers take a dive like Greg Lougainis with his gay ass
Rather be in Bebe's alley, than at the click with gators
Not a hater of the players, I'm more like a coach, or an owner
I Used To Love H.E.R., but now I bone her
At one point in rhyme I thought I lost my erection
I got that shit back with what? (The Resurrection)
The blessings upon Rash', old man who called him traitor (What)
Big Com-Stradamus, niggas styles I predict (Who you?)

[Chorus]
[Common]
I'm the C-to-the-O, double-M-O-N
Sit and think with a drink about how I'm gonna win (And who you?)

[Trugoy the Dove]
And I'm the D-to-the-O, the-V-to-the-E
And can't no other brothers cook these delicacies (And who you?)

[Posdnous]
Well, I'm the P-L-U, the-G-to-the-One
Walk around the planet Earth making money having fun
Walk around the planet Earth making money (What?)
Walk around the planet Earth, have fun

[Verse 3: Pos]
I'm the most from the coast of the Eastern flav'
Droppin' more knowledge than litter on the New York pave'
It's me, wonder why, in the place to be
Certified as superior MC
While others explore to make it hardcore
I make it hard for, wack MC's to even step inside this door
'Cause these rappers is rhymey, sometimey
And when we get to racin' on the mic, they line up to see
The lyrical killing, with stained egos on the ceiling
My rhymes escalates like black death rates
Over music plates, being played as the rule
Kids thinking stepping to my crew, you're labeled fools
Who claims to drop jewels but for now, listen
I don't give a shit on what crew you run, or what section of Earth you reside
You're not even a man so I don't deem it mandatory taking your pride
But I will, 'cause my man said Soul for the life
Y'all cry "Keepin' it real," yet you should try keepin' it right
That's understanding microphone mathematics (Ha)
Which leaves the currency in temporary world status (Yeah)
And when one shows he posed threat to this one
This one will make that one into none
Simple equation, zero, you shouldn't play hero
If you can't stand Strong like that Island I'm from

[Chorus]
[Posdnous]
Well, I'm the P-L-U, the-G-to-the-One
Walk around the planet Earth making money having fun

[Common]
I'm the-C-to-the-O, double-M-O-N
I sit and think with a drink about how I'm gonna win

[Trugoy the Dove]
And I'm the D-to-the-O, the-V-to-the-E
And can't no other brother cook these delicacies (Come on)
See, can't no other brothers cook these delicacies (What)
See, can't no other brothers cook these delicacies

[Outro: De La Soul & Common]
Com Sense (Com Sense), Plug One (Plug One)
Mos Def (Mos Def), ha ha ha ha
Dr. Ama (Dr. Ama), Maseo (Maseo), De La (De La)
Ha ha ha ha
L.I. (L.I.), Brooklyn (Brooklyn), Chi-town (Chi-town)
Ha ha ha ha (What)
You see, this is the way, this is the way (Way)
This is the way we organize